# Lab - Basic Excel Concepts

## Objectives

In this lab, you will perform some basic Excel functions.

  * Part 1: Basic Excel Formulas
  * Part 2: Basic Excel Functions
  * Part 3: Number Formatting

## Required Resources

Mobile device or PC/laptop with an internet connection and Microsoft Excel

> **Note:** The precise steps to format and manipulate data in Excel can vary between platforms and versions. The instructions in this lab are based on the free version of Excel available from Office.com and may have to be modified to match the user’s platform, software, or version to achieve the results shown in this lab.

## Introduction

This lab will introduce you to the basic and essential skills of Microsoft Excel.

## Instructions

-----

## Part 1: Basic Excel Formulas

There are two basic ways to perform calculations in Excel: **formulas** and **functions**. Formulas are expressions that operate on the values in a cell or range of cells; functions are predefined formulas built into Excel.

### Step 1: Open a Blank Workbook

If using the free version of Excel, log into Office.com, click on **Excel** and then click on **New blank workbook**.

### Step 2: Typing a Formula Inside a Cell.

Excel formulas begin with an equal “**=**” sign and are typed directly into a cell or into the **Formula Bar**, which is above the columns.

  * Click on cell **A1** to make it the active cell.
  * Type the following formula: `= 1+1` and then **Enter** on the keyboard. This formula adds 1 and 1 together. Notice that cell **A1** shows the result of the formula, 2, and the formula itself is shown in the formula bar when the cell is active.
  * Select cell **A2** and enter the formula `= 4-2`. This formula subtracts 2 from 4.
  * Select cell **A3** and enter the formula `= 2*4`. This formula multiplies 2 by 4.
  * Select cell **A4** and click in the formula bar. In the formula bar enter the formula `= 6/2`. This formula divides 6 by 2 and puts the results in cell A4.

f. Try entering a math formula with no equal sign in front. What is the result?

**Answer Area**
Excel doesn't take it as a mathematical operation. It sees it as text.
```text
Excel sees this as text and not as a formula.
```

*(Hide Answer)*

### Step 3: Using Cell References in a Formula

While Excel can act as a calculator and compute answers for formulas using number values, it can also use the values of other cells in formulas, and this is called a **cell reference**.

  * Delete the formulas from cells A1 through A4 so the worksheet is blank.
  * Enter the value **4** in cell **A1** and the value of **2** in cell **B1**.
  * In cell C1, enter the formula `= A1 + B1` and press **Enter**.
  * Notice that cell **C1** displays the result of 6, while the formula bar shows the formula you entered in cell **C1**.
  * Enter the following values in the respective cells:
      * Cell A2 = 4
      * Cell B2 = 2
      * Cell A3 = 4
      * Cell B3 = 2
      * Cell A4 = 4
      * Cell B4 = 2
  * Now enter the following formulas in column C.
      * In C2 enter the formula `= A2-B2`
      * In C3 enter the formula `= A3*B3`
      * In C4 enter the formula `= A4/B4`
  * The results should match the figure below:

| | A | B | C |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 1 | 4 | 2 | 6 |
| 2 | 4 | 2 | 2 |
| 3 | 4 | 2 | 8 |
| 4 | 4 | 2 | 2 |

Write the formula(s) that could be used to add together the values in three cells, A10, A11, and A12, using cell references.

**Answer Area**
= A10+A11+A12
```text
= A10+A11+A12 or =SUM(A10:A12)
```

*(Hide Answer)*

### Step 4: Add a New Column A

Now we will add a new **Column A** and put a description of each type of mathematical formula used in each row.

  * Click on **Column A** to select the column.
  * With column 1 selected, click the **Insert** button in the **Cells** group. (Remember you may have to expand the toolbar by clicking the down arrow at the far right of the tool bar to see the **Cell** group.)
  * A new **Column A** is added to the sheet. Fill in the following values in the **Column A** rows.
      * In cell A1, enter “Addition”
      * In cell A2, enter “Subtraction”
      * In cell A3, enter “Multiplication”
      * In cell A4, enter “Division”
  * Click and drag the vertical line between the A and B column headers to expand **Column A** so that the text fits into the cells. The result should look like the figure below:

| | A | B | C | D |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 1 | Addition | 4 | 2 | 6 |
| 2 | Subtraction | 4 | 2 | 2 |
| 3 | Multiplication | 4 | 2 | 8 |
| 4 | Division | 4 | 2 | 2 |

Notice that adding a new column A did not change the results of the formulas.

  * Click on cell D1 to view its formula in the Formula Bar. Excel changed the formula to account for the added new column A. The formula changed from `= A1+B1` to `= B1+C1` with the result in D1.

### Step 5: Add a New Row 1

To make the data easier to understand, add a header row.

  * Select **Row 1** by clicking on the row header.
  * With **Row 1** selected, click the **Insert** button in the **Cells** group. (Remember you may have to expand the tool bar by clicking the down arrow at the far right of the tool bar to see the **Cell** group.)
  * A new **Row 1** will be added above the data.
  * Enter the following values in the columns of the new **Row 1**:
      * In cell **A1**, enter “Math\_Operation”
      * In cell **B1**, enter “Variable A”
      * In cell **C1**, enter “Variable B”
      * In cell **D1**, enter “Result”
  * Select **Row 1** again and press **CTRL+B** on the keyboard to **bold** the text in **Row 1**.
  * Expand the width of the columns so that all text fits within the cells. The result should look like the figure below:

| | **A** | **B** | **C** | **D** |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| **1** | **Math\_Operation** | **Variable A** | **Variable B** | **Result** |
| 2 | Addition | 4 | 2 | 6 |
| 3 | Subtraction | 4 | 2 | 2 |
| 4 | Multiplication | 4 | 2 | 8 |
| 5 | Division | 4 | 2 | 2 |

  * Select the cells in **Column D** that contain the formulas. Notice that again, Excel has automatically adjusted the formulas to account for the added new Row 1.

### Step 6: Rename the Worksheet

  * Right click the name Sheet1 in the bottom left of the workbook screen and select **Rename**. Title the worksheet “**Formulas**.”

-----

## Part 2: Basic Excel Functions

Excel has many built-in functions, or predefined formulas, that are used to perform both simple and complex calculations. Five basic, built-in functions we will cover in this lab are **Sum**, **Average**, **Count**, **Max**, and **Min**.

### Step 1: Add a New Worksheet

  * Click the plus “**+**” button at the bottom left of the workbook screen to add a new worksheet.
  * Right click the new Sheet2 and rename it “**Functions**.”

### Step 2: Explore the Excel Function Library

  * Click on the **Formulas** tab in the toolbar to view the types of built-in functions in the **Function Library** group.
  * You may have to expand the toolbar by clicking the down arrow at the far right of the tool bar to see the Function Library group.
  * Click the dropdown arrow under the **AutoSum** Function. Note the five basic functions in this subgroup are as follows:
      * **Sum**: adds the numeric values in the referenced cells
      * **Average**: averages the numeric values in the referenced cells
      * **Count Numbers**: counts how many referenced cells there are
      * **Max**: returns the highest numeric value in the set of referenced cells
      * **Min**: returns the lowest numeric value in the set of referenced cells

### Step 3: Using the SUM function

  * Click on Cell **A1** and enter the value 10.
  * In Cells **A2** through **A5**, enter the following values:
      * Cell A2 = 7
      * Cell A3 = 5
      * Cell A4 = 9
      * Cell A5 = 12
  * Click on Cell **A6** to make it the active cell.
  * With Cell A6 selected, click the down arrow under the **AutoSum** button in the **Function Library** and then select **Sum**.
  * Notice that once you click **Sum** with this cell selected, Excel automatically assumes you want to add together all of the values in the cells above cell A6 and puts a blinking dashed boarder around those cells.
  * It also puts the matching formula in cell A6 of **`=SUM(A1:A5)`**. The cell range **A1:A5** in the formula is highlighted to show the cells that Excel is assuming you want to add together.
  * Note that Excel uses a colon “**:**” to indicate that all the cells from A1 through A5 are to be added together. This is a more efficient way to write the formula than =A1+A2+A3+A4+A5.
  * Press **Enter** on the keyboard to accept the formula. The value of **43** should now be in cell A6.
  * Insert a new Row 1, and in the new cell **A1**, enter the text “**SUM**” as shown below.

### Step 4: Using the Average Function

  * In cell **B1**, enter the text “**AVERAGE**”.
  * In cells **B2** through **B6** put in the values 10, 7, 5, 9, and 12, so they match the values in cells A2 through A6.
  * Select the blank cell **B7** and apply the **Average** function by clicking the down arrow under the AutoSum button in the **Function Library** and then selecting **Average**.
  * Again, once you elect **Average**, Excel automatically assumes you want to average all of the values in the cells above cell B7 and puts a blinking dashed boarder around those cells. It also puts the appropriate formula in cell B7 of **`=Average(B2:B6)`**.
  * Press **Enter** on the keyboard. The value **8.6**, which is the average of 10, 7, 5, 9, and 12, should now be in cell **B7**.

### Step 5: Using the COUNT Function

  * In cell **C1**, enter the text “**COUNT**”.
  * Fill in the values for cells **C2** through **C6** by copying cells **B2** through **B6** and pasting them into cells **C2** through **C6**.
      * To copy the cells, select cell **B2** and drag the mouse to select the range of cells **B2** through B6. Using the keyboard, press **CTRL+C** to copy.
      * To paste the contents into cells **C2** through **C6**, select cells **C2** through **C6** and use the keyboard press **CTRL+V** to paste the content.
  * Select the blank cell **C7** and apply the **Count** function by clicking the down arrow under the **AutoSum** button in the **Function Library** and then selecting **Count**.
  * The Count Numbers function **`=COUNT(C2:C6)`** will count the number of cells automatically included in the formula, which is **5**.

### Step 6: Using the MIN and MAX Functions

  * Repeat the processes in steps 4 and 5 above for the **MIN** and **MAX** functions.
  * Copy and paste the values of 10, 7, 5, 9, and 12 the cell ranges **D2** through **D6** and **E2** through **E6**.
  * In cell D7, apply the **MIN** function.
      * The Min function **`=MIN(D2:D6)`** returns the lowest of the values in the cells, which is **5**.
  * In cell E7, apply the **MAX** function.
      * The Max function **`=MAX(E2:E6)`** returns the highest of the values in the cells, which is **12**.

If the MIN function finds the smallest value and the MAX function finds the largest value, what function is used to find the middle value? How would the formula be written for calculating the middle value in cells F2 through F6?

**Answer Area**

```text
Answers: MEDIAN; =MEDIAN(F2:F6)
```

*(Hide Answer)*

### Step 7: Apply Formatting Enhancements

  * Select cells A1 through E1 and click the bold “**B**” button in the **Font** toolbar group. This will boldface the text in the column headings.
  * With cells **A1** through **E1** still selected, click the two center justify buttons in the **Alignment** toolbar group. This will center justify the text horizontally and vertically in the selected cells.
  * Select cells **A6** through **E6** and click the underline “**U**” button in the **Font** toolbar group. This will underline the values in the cells in row 6.
  * Finally Select cells **A7** through **E7** and press **CTRL+B** on the keyboard to boldface the number values in row 7.
  * The completed formatting should look like the figure below:

| | **SUM** | **AVERAGE** | **COUNT** | **MIN** | **MAX** |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 2 | 10 | 10 | 10 | 10 | 10 |
| 3 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 | 7 |
| 4 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 |
| 5 | 9 | 9 | 9 | 9 | 9 |
| 6 | 12 | 12 | 12 | 12 | 12 |
| 7 | **43** | **8.6** | **5** | **5** | **12** |

-----

## Part 3: Number Formatting

Excel has several formatting options specifically for cells that contain numbers. These include formats such as currencies, percentages, decimals, and dates.

### Step 1: Add a New Worksheet

  * Click the plus “**+**” button at the bottom left of the workbook screen to add a new worksheet.
  * Right click the new Sheet3 and rename it “**Numbers**”.

### Step 2: Explore the Number Formats

  * Right-click on any cell to display a pop-up menu. In the menu select **Number Format...** (Note: If using a paid version of Excel, the menu option will be called **Format Cells...**). This opens the **Number Format** dialog box.
  * In the Number Format dialog box, explore the categories of number formats by clicking on them and observing the Examples. For each format type, examples, as well as a description, are shown.
  * Number formats can also be applied from the tool bar using the buttons in the **Number** toolbar group.

### Step 3: Applying Number Formats

  * Enter the values shown below in the blank worksheet.

| | A | B | C | D | E | F | G |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 1 | Date | Product_Category | Order_Quantity | Cost | Revenue | Profit | % Profit |
| 2 | 1/1/2022 | Bikes | 2 | 3038 | 4837 | 1799 | |

  * Center justify the column headers.
  * Right justify Cell **B2**, Bikes, in Column B.
  * Change the date format for cell A2.
      * Right click cell **A2** and in the pop-up menu select **Number Format...**.
      * In the **Number Format** dialog box, select the **Date** category.
      * Change the data format so it has a two-digit year and becomes **01/01/22**.
  * Change Cost, Revenue, and Profit $ cells to US dollar currency.
      * Select cells **D2**, **E2**, and **F2**.
      * With the cells selected, click the dollar “**$**” button in the **Number** toolbar group. In the drop-down menu, select **$ English (United States)**.
  * Calculate the percentage of profits and change cell format to percent.
      * Select cell **G2**.
      * Type the formula `=D2/E2` to calculate the percent profit. The result should be **0.628075**. Change this to a percent by clicking the percent “**%**” button in the **Number** toolbar group. The result should be **63%**.
  * Once all the formatting changes are made, the worksheet should look as follows:

| | **Date** | **Product\_Category** | **Order\_Quantity** | **Cost** | **Revenue** | **Profit $** | **% Profit** |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 1 | 01/01/22 | Bikes | 2 | $3038.00 | $4837.00 | $1799.00 | 63% |
| 2 | 01/01/22 | Bikes | 2 | $3038.00 | $4837.00 | $1799.00 | 63% |

In addition to Date, Currency, and Percentage, what are five other common number format options in Excel?

**Answer Area**
Time, Text, General, Fraction, Scientific.
```text
Answers may include: General, Accounting, Time, Fraction, Scientific, Special, and Custom.
```

### Step 4: Save Your Workbook and Exit Excel

  * Save your workbook as “**Basic Concepts**” and exit Excel.
