# Lab - Importing Data into Excel

## Objectives
In this lab, you will review and import data files in Excel and cover the concept of delimiter fields.
* **Part 1:** Review a Delimited Text File and Save it as a CSV File
* **Part 2:** Opening a CSV File with the Free Version of Excel
* **Part 3:** Importing a Text and CSV file into the Full Version of Excel

## Required Resources
* Mobile device or PC/laptop with an internet connection
* An Office.com account to access the free version of Excel, or the full version of Excel or similar spreadsheet program such as OpenOffice

> **Note:** The precise steps to format and manipulate data in Excel can vary between platforms and versions. The instructions in this lab are based on the free version of Excel available from Office.com and may have to be modified to match the user’s platform, software, or version to achieve the results shown in this lab.

## Instructions

Data is often transmitted in the **CSV**, or comma separated values, format, which is a text-only format readable by many programs. We will discuss CSV files more in Module 3, but here we will look at the basic process of using one to ingest data into Excel.

---

## Part 1: Review a Delimited Text File and Save it as a CSV File

### Step 1: Review the text file in a text editor.

* Download the `bike sales.txt`.
* Open the file in Notepad or another text editor.

**Question:** What information is in the first line of the text file?
## Answer Area

> **The first line of the text file contains The Header Information.**
>
> **Explanation:** The first line contains the header information (column names/labels) for the data contained in the document.

---
**How many data columns do you expect to be in the data file generated from this CSV? What will the column headings be?**
### Answer Area

I expect 13 columns and the columns headings will be Date,Month,Year,Customer\_Age,Age\_Group,Customer\_Gender,Country,State,Product\_Category,Order\_Quantity,Profit,Cost, Revenue 

There are thirteen data columns. The headers are Date, Month, Year, Customer\_Age, Age\_Group, Gender, Country, State, Product\_Category, Order\_Quantity, Profit, Cost, and Revenue.
Hide Answer

**What character is used as the delimiter to separate each piece of data in the file?**
### Answer Area

The comma

Comma

Hide Answer

Keep the text file open for Part 2 of the lab.

### Step 2: Saving a Delimited Text File as a CSV File

> **Note:** If you are not using the free version of Excel, the CSV file may automatically be uploaded as a spreadsheet.

The free version of Excel from Office.com does not have the features required to automatically import a delimited text file as a spreadsheet. Therefore, the text file will need to be saved as a CSV file so that it can be opened with the free version of Excel.

Save the `bike sales.txt` file as a CSV file.
1. Select **File** > **Save As**.
2. In the **File Name** box, change the name to `bike sales`, add the **.csv** file extension at the end of the file name, and then click **Save**.
    * You should now have a new file named `bike sales.csv`.
3. Upload the `bike sales.csv` to your **OneDrive** space. 

---

## Part 2: Opening a CSV File with Free Version of Excel

1. In Excel, click **File** > **Open** and then at the bottom right of the Open window, click on **View more files**.  This opens the *My files* window, which should contain the `bike sales.csv` file.
2. Select the `bike sales.csv` file to open it.

> **Note:** Excel converts the file to a `.xlsx` file when it opens.

## Part 3: Importing a Text and CSV File into the Full Version of Excel

If you have access to the full paid version of Excel, you can complete the following steps. If not, screenshots are provided so that you can see how importing text and CSV files is accomplished in the full version of Excel.

### Step 1: Import the data file.
1. Start **Excel**.
2. To import the text file, click **Data** > **Get Data** > **From File** > **From Text/CSV**. (CSV stands for comma-separated values). 
3. Open the file `bike sales.txt`.
4. A preview of the data in the text file will open as shown below. 
    * **Note:** Excel was able to identify the columns headings and the individual records in the text file. Excel can do this because it recognizes the commas as the delimiter for separating the data points.
  
    * 5. Click **Load**, and Excel loads the data into a table in the worksheet as shown below.  (Only the first six columns are shown here.)

---

Importing a **.csv** file into Excel is the same process as importing a **.txt** file.

1. To import the `.csv` file click **Data** > **Get Data** > **From File** > **From Text/CSV**.
2. This time open the file `bike sales_delimited.csv`.
3. Click **Load** in the preview window, as was done in step 5 above.

---

> Show All Answers
> Clear All Responses

***
*© 2017 - 2023 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco*
