### 5.5.3 What You Can Do with VLOOKUP
VLOOKUP is a very powerful data analysis tool within Excel and is great when you need to find information in a large spreadsheet or if you are consistently looking for the same type of information.

VLOOKUP is an abbreviation of “vertical lookup,” and it’s a function that searches a (vertical) column in a table for a specified value. This means that the data must be organized in a table where each row has different but related forms of data in each column. If an approximate match is specified in the formula, the first column (the lookup column) must be sorted in numeric or alphabetic order.

A VLOOKUP function consists of 4 key pieces of information:

* The value to search for
* The range to search in
* The column in the range that contains the value you want the function to return
* An indication of whether the function should return an approximate match (TRUE, in the function) or only an exact match (FALSE) of the return value. The default for VLOOKUP is an approximate match if FALSE is not specified in the function.

VLOOKUP searches for a value in the leftmost column of a table and, when the value is found, returns information from the same row but in another column.

#### XLOOKUP, an alternative to VLOOKUP
XLOOKUP is a newer lookup function, similar to VLOOKUP, that is not available in all versions of Excel currently in use. With XLOOKUP, you can look in any column (not only the leftmost in a table) for a search term and return a result from the same row. One difference is that XLOOKUP defaults to returning an exact match, whereas VLOOKUP defaults to closest match unless the FALSE keyword is used. In this course, you may use either VLOOKUP or XLOOKUP to obtain the desired results if they are both available in the spreadsheet tool you are using.

**Note:** XLOOKUP is not backward compatible, so worksheets using XLOOKUP may not be usable in earlier versions of Excel.

#### VLOOKUP Example: Look Up a Typed Value
In the example below, a VLOOKUP formula (shown in the formula bar at the top) has been entered into cell G3 that will return the budget of a movie when a movie title is typed into cell G2. The formula `=VLOOKUP(G2,A1:D11,3,FALSE)` tells Excel to search the range of cells A1 through D11 for the row with the information typed into G2 and, if it finds a match, to return the value in column 3 for that row. The FALSE tells Excel to look for an exact match between the title and the budget. In this screenshot, the Budget cell G3 has an #N/A error message, because nothing has been entered into G2 yet.


After entering a movie title, as shown in the figure below, the formula returns the budget for that movie.

#### VLOOKUP Example: Data Cleaning
VLOOKUP can also be used for data cleaning. For example, you can use it to compare two columns (or lists) and find values that appear in both.

In the example spreadsheet below, “Good” superheroes are listed in column A and “Evil” villains are listed in Column B. There should be no duplicates between these two columns, because you can’t be both at the same time, and the VLOOKUP function can be used to find any names listed in both columns. There are multiple ways to do this using VLOOKUP. In this example, for each villain, the cell to the right of the villain’s name will hold a VLOOKUP function to indicate whether he also appears in the “Good” column.

The formula to search for Abomination in Column A is written in cell C2 as `=VLOOKUP(B2,$A$2:$A$10,1,FALSE)`. This compares the value in B2 with the range A2:A10. The $ symbols, as you may recall, tell Excel to reference cells A2 through A10, even when we copy the formula to other cells. If there is no duplicate (meaning Abomination is not found in the list of superheroes), then an error (#N/A) is displayed, as shown.

But if we replace Abomination’s name in the Evil list with Agent 13, as below, VLOOKUP will find Agent 13 also listed as Good in cell A7 and the duplicate name is shown in cell C2.

The formula can be copied to the other cells in Column C to check all the entries in each column. Because of the $ symbols, it will still look in cells A2 through A10 for the names.

#### Customizing Results
With a small addition, VLOOKUP can be written to display custom text to reflect whether an entry appears in both columns or not, like so:

`=IF(ISNA(VLOOKUP(B2,$A$2:$A$10,1,FALSE)),"Unique","Duplicate")`

Above, the formula is modified by adding the IF and ISNA functions, and the values Unique and Duplicate. The IF function makes logical comparisons, and the ISNA function looks for cells containing the #N/A error message. Together, they tell Excel to return “Unique” if the VLOOKUP function finds no duplicate (and so returns an error) and to return “Duplicate” otherwise. The formula is copied to the other cells to give the results below.

In the next lab, you will have an opportunity to practice using VLOOKUP.
